equals macro (#8729)
fishtown-analytics/docs.getdbt.com: website/docs/reference/global-configs/behavior-changes.md

| [require_yaml_configuration_for_mf_time_spines](#metricflow-time-spine-yaml)                  | 2024.10          | TBD*                | 1.9.0           | TBD*              | ✅ |
| [require_batched_execution_for_custom_microbatch_strategy](#custom-microbatch-strategy)                  | 2024.11         | TBD*                | 1.9.0           | TBD*              | ✅ |
| [require_nested_cumulative_type_params](#cumulative-metrics)         |   2024.11         | TBD*                 | 1.9.0           | TBD*            | - |

> | [enable_truthy_nulls_equals_macro](#null-safe-equality-equals-macro) | 2025.02 | TBD* | 1.9.0 | TBD* | - |

Author: Are the `dbtLatest: Intro` and `dbt Core: Intro` values accurate?

I referred to this [PR](https://github.com/dbt-labs/dbt-adapters/pull/744) but I'm not sure which release first included the change

Reviewer: > Are the `dbtLatest: Intro` and `dbt Core: Intro` values accurate?

Not sure -- we'll need to check somehow.

Author: Checking [here](https://dbt-labs.slack.com/archives/C067EUS2D7S/p1772815775625049)

> | [enable_truthy_nulls_equals_macro](#null-safe-equality-equals-macro) | 2025.02 | TBD* | 1.9.0 | TBD* | - |

Reviewer 2: If this is backported to Core v1.9 should we add it to that upgrade guide above as well? Or is it Snowflake from 1.9-1.11 and other adapters in v1.12?

Reviewer: Since `dbt-adapters` is decoupled from `dbt-core`, I don't think there is is one Core version it first appears in.

Rather, my understanding is that it is _compatible_ back to 1.9 (when the decoupling happened). We'd need to actually try it out to confirm/deny.

Reviewer 2: Thanks @dbeatty10

```

### Null-safe equality (equals macro)

The `enable_truthy_nulls_equals_macro` flag is `False` by default. Setting it to `True` in your `dbt_project.yml` enables null-safe equality in the dbt [equals](/reference/dbt-jinja-functions/cross-database-macros#equals) macro, which is used in incremental and snapshot materializations.

By default, the `equals()` macro follows SQL's [three-valued logic (3VL)](https://modern-sql.com/concept/three-valued-logic), so `NULL = NULL` evaluates to `UNKNOWN` rather than `TRUE`.

> When the `enable_truthy_nulls_equals_macro` flag is enabled, the equals macro uses the `IS NOT DISTINCT FROM` operator where supported, so two values are equal if they match or if both are `NULL`. This evaluates each expression once and lets the engine treat the comparison as a single equality predicate, which can improve query plans (for example, hash joins on nullable keys or index usage).

Reviewer: I suggest that we remove the specific implementation details out because they can change. But we should leave the semantic intent that the implements will either use the `IS NOT DISTINCT FROM` operator directly or simulate its behavior:

```suggestion
When the `enable_truthy_nulls_equals_macro` flag is enabled, the equals macro uses the semantics of the `IS NOT DISTINCT FROM` operator with two `NULL` values treated as equal.
```

To enable the flag, add it under `flags` in `dbt_project.yml`:

<File name='dbt_project.yml'>

```yml
flags:
  enable_truthy_nulls_equals_macro: true
```

> </File>

Reviewer: Love this so much -- so useful! 🤩

```

> ### Null-safe equality (equals macro)

Reviewer 2: Same feedback as above - do we also need the beta callout here?

The `enable_truthy_nulls_equals_macro` flag is `False` by default. Setting it to `True` in your `dbt_project.yml` enables null-safe equality in the dbt [equals](/reference/dbt-jinja-functions/cross-database-macros#equals) macro, which is used in incremental and snapshot materializations.

By default, the `equals()` macro follows SQL's [three-valued logic (3VL)](https://modern-sql.com/concept/three-valued-logic), so `NULL = NULL` evaluates to `UNKNOWN` rather than `TRUE`.

> When the `enable_truthy_nulls_equals_macro` flag is enabled, the equals macro uses the semantics of the [`IS NOT DISTINCT FROM`](https://modern-sql.com/feature/is-distinct-from) operator with two `NULL` values treated as equal.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When the `enable_truthy_nulls_equals_macro` flag is enabled, the `equals()` macro uses the semantics of the [`IS NOT DISTINCT FROM`](https://modern-sql.com/feature/is-distinct-from) operator with two `NULL` values treated as equal.
```

```

> ### Null-safe equality (equals macro)

Reviewer 2: For the anchor link
```suggestion
### Null-safe equality (equals macro) {#null-safe-equality}
```
